h2. Translator - i18n tooling for Rails

Translator make using the internationalization (i18n) facility introduced in Rails 2.2 simpler by keeping your code DRY through simple conventions.

h3. The Problem

The (very!) helpful "I18n":http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/I18n.html library finds keys in locale bundles, but doesn't know anything about Rails application layouts (models/views/controllers/mailers). For Rails apps that have a lot of strings, this can lead to un-DRY code.  

Translator defines a convention for the hierarchy of keys within locale bundles. When looking up a key for translation it infers a context for the request. This can make the code simpler to read, while still using the handy I18n library.

h3. Example

Assuming a locale YAML file for English strings that looks like:

<pre>
<code>
en:
  blog_posts: # controller
    show: # action
      title: "My Blog Posts"
      byline: "Posted by {{author}}"
</code>
</pre>

Without Translator in the @BlogPostsController.show@ action or @show.erb@ template, to pull up the title string would be @I18n.translate('blog_posts.show.title')@. Translator knows the context so it can simply be @t('title')@.

h3. Features

h4. Simple @translate@ (or @t@) method added to:

* ActionController
* ActionView
* ActiveRecord
* ActionMailer

*TODO* Describe backoff scoping

h4. Test Helpers

*TODO* Describe test helpers

h3. Key Conventions

*TODO* Describe the convention for: 
* controllers
* views (normal, layouts, partials)
* models
* mailers

h3. Installation

To install this plugin into your Rails app:

@./script/plugin install git://github.com/graysky/translator.git@

h3. RDoc API

"RDocs are online":http://graysky.github.com/translator/rdoc/index.html or can be generated via @rake rdoc@ in the translator directory.


Bug reports welcome. Patches very welcome.

Copyright (c) 2009 "Mike Champion":http://graysky.org, released under the MIT license
